## The Myth of the Mobile Web

When I came to Grand Valley in 2010, they were already looking for ways to deal with the increasing number of mobile devices that visited the library website. For my interview, they asked me to speak about the future of the mobile web and how it related to libraries. I stood in front of my future colleagues and told them that the question itself was misguided. You see, there is no mobile web.

It's a myth. 

The myth, I think, comes from an outdated understanding of mobile phones. In the early ninties, a teenager like Zach Morris on Saved By the Bell using a cell phone was a punch line in a sitcom. Mobile phones were for busy professionals who were on the go and didn't have time to wait around for calls. Twenty years later, we are on track to have more activated mobile devices than people on the planet. TK% of Americans own a cell phone, including TK% of teenagers. Mobile phones are no longer a business tool for the distracted professional. They are a lifestyle tool for everyone.

But the myth of the Mobile web stil encourages us to think about mobile web use by distracted people who are on the go on a slow network. But the data shows a more complicated picture of how people user the web on mobile devices. According to a 2010 TK report, TK% of smartphone owners browse the web on a mobile device while home, TK% while waiting in line or during miscellaneous downtimes[SOURCE], and TK% even admit to using them in the bathroom[SOURCE]. The thing is, phones are increasingly becoming a go-to web browsing device.

But we've made assumptions over the years about how our users browse the web on their phones and have built our ghettoized mobile websites accordingly. 

But you wouldn't know that from the way most libraries deal with this.

[CAN I USE A TWEET AS AN IMAGE IN THE ARTICLE? HOW TO CITE ETC.]



The prevailing methods for serving up "mobile" versions of a website are either detecting the users' device or detecting the users' browser. Both methods have technical drawbacks. To detect a device and know whether it should get the "mobile" website, you need a library of every mobile device that might visit your website. If you are a library, trying to provide access to all, that means every mobile device made, ever. TK new models of smartphones are released every week around the world. There are already TK different models of tablets computer available, even though the 

My colleagues trusted me on this point, but in the library world, the phrase "mobile web" still has a lot of traction. But this idea that there are two "Webs:" the desktop web and the mobile web, has some insidious consequences for our small-screen friends. By assuming that mobile devices somehow access something different than their desktop counterparts, we give ourselves permission to offer less and less to our users on mobile devices under the guise of giving them what they need.

I've heard a number of critics argue that our users don't want to search library holdings on a phone, or won't use this or that service on a phone because the screen is too small. But more and more televisions are becoming internet-enabled, and so to keep the viability of that argument, we'll have to be like Goldilocks, assuming that certain tasks need a screen neither too big nor too small. The fact is, someone, somewhere is likely try just about anything on a phone, or a television, or an internet-connected device you haven't thought of yet. Libraries don't make assumptions about what types of physical access our users should have based on physical or mental attributes. Why is it okay to restrict what your users can do on the web based on how big their device is?

And when we talk about smartphone users, we aren't just taking about middle- and upper-middle class patrons. An increasing number of adults only or primarily access the Web from their phones. As of the summer of 2012, TK% of adults in the US used a mobile device as their primary way to access the internet. If you work for an academic library, you have a more pressing charge. 45% of 18-29 year-olds in the United States access the web primarly from their phone[SOURCE]. 

New data coming out shows that many of our library patrons are becoming multi-device 

The devices we have right now have a variety of screen sizes, and that's the primary way we've thought about writing media queries.

VIEW

PERFORMANCE

